Promoting Supplier Diversity in Higher Education
A major research focus of the Lab for Inclusive Entrepreneurship is identifying ways to promote relationships between higher education procurement teams and diverse small businesses.

Why this is important
According to the National Center for Education Statistics, between 2018 and 2019, the spending of HEIs in the U.S. reached $632 billion (in current dollars), two-thirds of which was spent by public institutions and the remaining one thirds by private institutions. Yet, a majority of HEI spending was associated with a limited number of large businesses, which dwarfed the participation of DOSBs. A GBH News analysis, for instance, showed that only 12 contracts (about 2%) out of nearly 700 made by a big college purchasing co-op in Massachusetts were awarded to minority-owned businesses.

What we’ve learned
Over the past 12 months, the Lab for Inclusive Entrepreneurship has published two reports on supplier diversity in higher education.

In a May 2022 research report titled “Promoting Supplier Diversity in Higher Education,” we identified the barriers and opportunities in doing business with colleges and universities based on a survey of diverse small businesses located in New England.




Recently, we issued a report titled “Addressing the Supplier Diversity Awareness Deficit: The Role of Higher Education Procurement Websites.” We know that supplier diversity web pages can make a difference; they can open a window into an institution’s procurement process, which is very often seen as complex and confusing by small businesses. Deciding what kinds of information to share (and how to share it) can serve as a way for an institution to listen to the needs of its local diverse business community and demonstrate its commitment to diversity and inclusion. Our latest research report examines to what extent 114 colleges and universities in New England open the window to supplier diversity opportunities.


How we plan to move forward with this work
With the support of a three-year Knowledge Challenge grant from the Kauffman Foundation, which supports activities that improve our understanding of entrepreneurship, the Lab will conduct research, hold an annual symposium, and serve as a forum for idea sharing.
The overall goal goes beyond research; It is to generate practical, actionable policy recommendations for higher education procurement teams and create educational programs for diverse small business owners that will help them compete for business.


Kauffman Knowledge Challenge
The 2022 Knowledge Challenge RFP is intended to support activities that improve our understanding of entrepreneurship and generate practical, actionable, and rigorous evidence to inform decision making and change systems. 

Share:
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
The 2022 Knowledge Challenge focuses on two areas: systems and structures to support inclusive prosperity, and equitable opportunities and the future of work.  

Meet the grantees funded in the 2022 Knowledge Challenge: 
American Sustainable Business Institute | Support for research to identify scalable best practice cases, observations, and tools focused on alternative ownership models and community-supported entrepreneurship in the United States, including alternative ownership opportunities, alternative capital raising, and alternative lending and deployment methods.  

Board of Regents Nevada System of Higher Education, on behalf of the University of Nevada System | Support to study job creation among entrepreneurs by examining the effects of various policy levers — including minimum wages, payroll taxes and employment protection legislation — on entrepreneurial hiring and job creation in communities that vary by wealth levels and racial and ethnic composition.  

Brookings Institution | Support for policy reports and events to produce evidence-based research and policy work to inform key decision-makers about policies to support entrepreneurs and reduce economic inequality.  

Champlain College | Support for community and action-based research that will explore contexts, networks, and outcomes for women, migrant, and BIPOC entrepreneurs in two US communities on the East Coast. 

Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc. | Support to study how financial aid policies may affect post-college opportunities to become entrepreneurs, and how resulting entrepreneurial activity may differ across communities and geographic regions.  

Johns Hopkins University | Support for community-led research that identifies barriers and opportunities, and develops interventions to support systemically marginalized entrepreneurs.  

Kean University Foundation | Support to research, and implement, measures that support the resilience of Black entrepreneurs during exogenous shocks.  

NEST | Support to build and disseminate knowledge around the barriers to economic advancement faced by makers and creative entrepreneurs, particularly those in Black and Indigenous communities.  

Northeastern University | Support for research on how to increase supplier diversity in higher education procurement.  

RAND | Support to build a dataset to answer questions about the challenges that newer, smaller businesses face, the supports they rely on, and the ways in which solutions can be more effectively targeted to maximize their growth and success.  

Regents of the University of Michigan | Support for research to identify trauma-informed practices that could improve the quality of inclusive entrepreneurial support services.  

Research Foundation of State University of New York | Support for research to identify the impact of state funding and Regional Economic Development Council’s policies on rural and agriculture-focused entrepreneurs in New York State over the last decade and their effect on strengthening entrepreneurship and re-localizing food systems.  

Research Foundation of The City University of New York | Support for research to identify the comparative success rates of new businesses which receive either individualistic or cooperative ESO support and will explore if there are approaches that individualistic ESOs, those who support more of a single-founder model, can learn from those working with cooperatives and vice versa.  

Texas State University Development Foundation | Support for research to identify the inter-related, systemic challenges that Latino-Owned Businesses (LOBs) face when growing and develop tools to help these business owners overcome such obstacles.

The Regents of the University of California at Riverside | Support for research to identify the role that local and regional partnership networks play in fostering inclusive entrepreneurship ecosystems in traditionally underserved communities and how these partnerships function across cities.  

The Regents of the University of California at San Diego | Support to study how gender, race/ethnicity, and geography interact to shape the experience of small business owners — particularly regarding access to government lending during COVID-19.  

United Way of Northern New Jersey, Inc. | Support for research on measuring and addressing systemic inequities in the maintainer labor force. 

The University of Pittsburgh | Support to study the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the great reshuffling on how individuals work, who they work for, and the implication for equitable opportunities.  

Washington University | Support for research on emerging entrepreneurship-centered community wealth building (ECCWB) models. 

What is the Kauffman Knowledge Challenge Request for Proposals (RFP)?
The Knowledge Challenge is a biannual program that invites proposals for research activities aimed at improving our basic understanding of entrepreneurs and the levers, tools, and methods that can advance entrepreneurship in the United States. The Knowledge Challenge is open to proposers conducting research in universities and academic institutions, laboratories, companies, nonprofit organizations, and as individuals. The goal of the Knowledge Challenge is to produce tangible insights for entrepreneurs, entrepreneurship program and policy design, ecosystem leaders, and researchers.

The portfolios of grants sourced from the Knowledge Challenge reflects the problem-based grantmaking approach in our Research strategy.